[typing]
[train rolling over tracks]
["Your Hand in Mine" by Explosions in the
Sky begins to play very softly]
(Computer-generated voice) See there is
this thing called writing.
And it’s great.
[soft guitar notes]
(Male narrator) I love writing. But I’m
supposed to be here to talk about data.
Writing, ah, I mean data is so cool.
Look at how it helps us make sense
of something like an election.
Um. Okay. Maybe I should rethink that.
The word out of the 2016 presidential
election was the death of data,
and the rise of stories.
[music plays quietly; soft guitar notes]
(Computer-generated voice) It's not that
politics don't matter,
but writing, writing that's
a human activity.
[Indistinct background conversation]
(Narrator) I don’t know.
Death is so serious.
At most, maybe data just had a bad day.
And if the point is to
tell stories and write our lives,
well, data is doing that even as we speak.
And it’s kind of already political.
And it’s kind of taken on a life of its
own. Here it is built into an assignment.
[A computer chime rings]
And here is someone using it
for scholarship in the humanities,
telling stories with it.
[Soft guitar and drums]
And it’s really kind of
interesting to play around with.
We used this spreadsheet.
It was surprisingly easy to
gather an archive of tweets.
And then we could think about
the terms we might use
to make sense of the many tweets.
We learned to think about data and tell
some stories—almost feels like a campfire.
And look what the machine
put together for us.
It’s so cool, all referenced
with metadata and sortable.
And watch this, we can run the tweets
through a sentiment analysis algorithm.
So cool.
[soft music; typing]
(Computer-generated voice) I don't think
we are talking about the same thing.
Sometimes you still need to draw a line.
[Soft guitar notes play quietly]
(Narrator) I'm with you, probability 100.
That computational analysis
of postruth is bogus.
Look at those tweets. Debates
on the topic. Dystopia.
A wake up call. Posttruth is
no positive development.
[train horn]
(Computer-generated voice) What is that?
[crossing bells, train horn]
(Narrator) That's a train horn. They
were amazing network makers
in the analog days.
Their horns sound lonesome.
(Computer-generated voice) I know that.
I have access to all the databases.
(Narrator) It's cool that they run in
Portland right through the town,
down by the river.
(Computer-generated voice) Yeah.
Their horns sound lonesome.
(Narrator) Anyway, back to the tweets.
We got about 1,000 of them
cleaned up in the spreadsheet.
And then we started assigning
meaning to them—metadata.
We all worked on the
same spreadsheet, filling in data.
And then our spreadsheet gave us these
tools to computationally assist our coding
The tweets weren't positive, obviously.
We only found a
positive sentiment 5.3% of the time.
[soft train sounds and music]
(Computer-generated voice) I still don’t
think we are on the same page.
I’m talking shady characters
and fuzzy operations,
deep intrigue, the stuff of storytelling.
(Narrator) Oh, this is fuzzy, and shady.
Our 5.3 percent is just one study,
but it feels right.
Come on, just between me and you:
it’s a lot of counting, interpreting,
and representing.
Maybe we can focus on the stories coming
out of that process. Let’s look at those.
(Male student speaking) I have chosen
to mark as well as I can
the emotions of each one within certain
broad categories,
the temporal focus,
when is the tweet referring to,
and does the tweet include a call to
action no matter how big or how small.
[Music plays quietly]
(Narrator) So, I asked everyone to share
their discoveries from working with data.
Really, it’s pretty much like writing.
It’s framing things, asking
questions, representing ideas.
And trying to make change in the world.
In fact, the best part
of the experience
[train horn and bells]
is the way it helps us question
our basic assumptions.
(Female student speaking) Humans need
to categorize everything.
That’s the only way we can
navigate in this world.
[electronic music]
But putting everything
in boxes is problematic.
What happens when the object does not fit?
In the action of defining lines
for when a term is in a category
and when it’s outside
lies a lot of judgment.
Every word makes up for its own category:
woman, sci-fi, horror, beautiful,
nationality, clever, left-wing,
truth, depression, art, etc.
In the following I wish to investigate
the three categories:
human, computer, and, um,
the category, category.
["Your Hand in Mine" plays]
(Narrator) I remember my dad told me
a story about human development.
He said, much boiled down
to accidents of eyes and ears.
Somehow our eyes and ears
evolved to either side of our heads,
giving us binary brains,
with switching and signals.
He liked the long view.
Just this week he told me things sometimes
get worse before they get better.
He said, what we’ve done follows from
that change, from that binary brain.
Our sight. Our smell.
The way we walk. Our bridges.
The streams of vapor
we leave tracing the sky.
[soft guitar notes increasing
in intensity]
I once wrote some poems
about the organic mechanic.
I layered one beneath an article
about Mac and PC characters.
[drums join guitars]
The poems were about metaphors
and the aesthetics and power of materials
and design in machines.
[Music plays]
The space shuttle. The telephone.
I can tell, you bridges sing, my friend.
Make no mistake about it, bridges sing.
(Computer-generated voice) Look, you can
mix together all the people and machines
you want; I still want to hear
the sound of a human voice.
[music plays]
(Narrator) I hear you.
(Narrator and computer-generated voice
together) Amen to that, my friend, amen.
[music plays; soft traffic sounds,
soft typing]
[music fades out]